[Music]
[Applause]
you
[Music]
[Laughter]
you
[Music]
thank you it's it's a this is a distinct
privilege to be here a few weeks ago I
saw a video on youtube of congresswoman
gabrielle giffords at the early stages
of her recovery from one of those awful
bullets this one entered her left
hemisphere and knocked out her Broca's
area the speech center of her brain and
in this this session gabby is working
with a speech therapist and she's
struggling to produce some of the most
basic words and you can see her growing
more and more devastated until she
ultimately breaks down into sobbing
tears and she starts sobbing wordlessly
into the arms of her therapist and after
a few moments her therapist tries a new
tack and they start singing together and
Gabby starts to sing through her tears
and you can hear her clearly able to
enunciate the words to a song that
described the way she feels and she
sings in one descending scale she sings
let it shine let it shine let it shine
and it's a very powerful and poignant
reminder of how the beauty of music has
the ability to speak where words fail in
this case literally speak seeing this
video of Gabby Giffords reminded me of
the work of doctor Gottfried slouched
one of the preeminent neuroscientists
studying music in the brain at Harvard
and Schlag is a proponent of a therapy
called melodic intonation therapy which
has become very popular in music therapy
now Klout found that his stroke victims
who were a phasic could not form
sentences of three or four word
sentences but they could still sing the
lyrics to a song whether it was happy
birthday to you or their favorite song
by the Eagles or the Rolling Stones and
after 70 hours of intensive singing
lessons he found that the music was able
to literally rewire the brains of his
patients and create a homologous speech
center in their right hemisphere to
compensate for the left hemispheres
damage when I was 17 I visited dr.
Sloan's lab and in one afternoon he
walked me through some of the leading
research on music in the brain how
musicians had fundamentally different
brain structure than non musicians how
music and listening to music could just
light up the entire brain from our
prefrontal cortex all the way back to
our cerebellum
how music was becoming a
neuropsychiatric modality to help
children with autism to help people
struggling with stress and anxiety and
depression how deeply parkinsonian
patients would find that their tremor
and their gait would steady when they
listen to music and how late stage
Alzheimer's patients whose dementia was
so far progressed that they could no
longer recognize their family could
still pick out a tune by Chopin at the
piano that they had learned when they
were children but I had an ulterior
motive
of visiting God for each log and it was
this that I was at a crossroads in my
life trying to choose between music and
medicine I had just completed my
undergraduate and I was working as a
research assistant at the lab of tennis
SELCO studying Parkinson's disease at
Harvard and I had fallen in love with
neuroscience I wanted to become a
surgeon I wanted to become a doctor like
Paul Farmer or Rick Hodes he's kind of
fearless men who go into places like
Haiti or if he Opia and work with AIDS
patients with multi drug-resistant
tuberculosis or with children with
disfiguring cancers I wanted to become
that kind of Red Cross doctor that
doctor Without Borders on the other hand
I had played the violin my entire life
music for me was more than a passion it
was obsession it was oxygen I was lucky
enough to have studied at the Juilliard
School in Manhattan and to have played
my debut with Zubin Mehta and the
Israeli Philharmonic Orchestra in Tel
Aviv and it turned out that godfrid
Schlag had studied as an organist at the
Vienna conservatory but had given up his
love for music to pursue a career in
medicine and that afternoon I had to ask
him how was it for you making that
decision and he said that there were
still times when he wished he could go
back and play the organ the way he used
to and that for me medical school could
wait but that the violin simply would
not and after two more years of studying
music I decided to shoot for the
impossible before taking the MCAT and
applying to medical school like a good
Indian son to become the next dr. Gupta
and I I decided to shoot for the
impossible I took an audition for the
esteemed Los Angeles Philharmonic it was
my first audition and after three days
of playing behind a screen and a trial
week I was offered that
and it was a dream it was a wild dream
to perform in an orchestra perform in
the iconic Walt Disney Concert Hall in
an orchestra conducted now by the famous
Gustavo Dudamel but much more
importantly to me to be surrounded by
musicians and mentors that became my new
family my new musical home but a year
later I met another musician who had
also studied at Juilliard one who
profoundly helped me find my voice and
shaped my identity as a musician
Nathaniel Ayers was a double bassist at
Juilliard but he suffered a series of
psychotic episodes in his early 20s was
treated with Thorazine at Bellevue and
ended up living homeless on the streets
of Skid Row in downtown Los Angeles 30
years later
Nathaniel story has become a beacon for
homelessness and mental health advocacy
throughout the United States as told
through the book in the movie the
soloist but I became his friend and I
became his violin teacher and I told him
that wherever he had his violin wherever
I had mine I would play a lesson with
him and on the many times I saw
Nathaniel on Skid Row I witnessed how
music was able to bring him back from
his very darkest moments from what
seemed to me in my untrained eye to be
the beginnings of a schizophrenic
episode playing for Nathaniel the music
took on a deeper meaning because now it
was about communication a communication
where words fail the communication of a
message that went deeper than words that
registered at a fundamentally primal
level in Nathaniel psyche yet came as a
true musical offering from me I found
myself growing outraged that someone
like Nathaniel could have ever been a
homeless on Skid Row because of his
mental illness yet how many tens of
thousands of others there were out there
on Skid Row alone who had stories as
tragic as his but were never going to
have a book or a movie made about them
that got them off the streets at the
very core of this crisis of mine I felt
somehow the life of music had chosen me
were somehow pressed possibly in a very
naive sense I felt what Skid Row really
needed was
buddy like Paul Farmer and not another
classical musician playing on Bunker
Hill but in the end it was Nathanael who
showed me that if I was truly passionate
about change if I wanted to make a
difference I already had the perfect
instrument to do it that music was the
bridge that connected my world in his
there's a beautiful quote by the
romantic German composer Robert Schumann
who said to send light into the darkness
of men's hearts such as the duty of the
artist and this is a particularly
poignant quote because Schumann himself
suffered from schizophrenia and died in
asylum and inspired by what I learned
from Nathaniel I started an organization
on Skid Row of musicians called Street
symphony bringing the light of music
into the very darkest places performing
for the homeless and mentally ill at
shelters and Clinics on Skid Row
performing for combat veterans with
post-traumatic stress disorder and for
the incarcerated and those labeled as
criminally insane after one of our
events at the Patton State Hospital in
San Bernardino a woman walked up to us
and she had tears streaming down her
face and she had a palsy she was shaking
and she had this gorgeous smile and she
said that she had never heard classical
music before she didn't think she was
gonna like it she had never heard a
violin before but that hearing this
music was like hearing the sunshine and
that nobody ever came to visit them and
that for the first time in six years
when she heard us play she stopped
shaking without medication suddenly what
we're finding with these concerts away
from the stage away from the footlights
out of the tuxedo tails
the musicians become the conduit for
delivering the tremendous therapeutic
benefits of music on the brain to an
audience that would never have access to
this room would never have access to the
kind of music that we make just as
medicine serves to heal more than the
building blocks of the body alone the
power and beauty of music transcends the
E in the middle of our beloved acronym
music transcends the aesthetic beauty
alone
the synchrony of emotions that we
experience when we hear an opera by
vogner or a symphony by Brahms or
chamber music by Beethoven compels us to
remember our shared common humanity the
deeply communal connected consciousness
the empathic consciousness that
neuropsychiatrist in McGilchrist says is
hardwired into our brains right
hemisphere and for those living in the
most dehumanizing conditions of mental
illness within homelessness and
incarceration the music and the beauty
of music offers a chance for them to
transcend the world around them to
remember that they still have the
capacity to experience something
beautiful and that humanity has not
forgotten them and the spark of that
beauty the spark of that humanity
transforms into hope and we know whether
we choose the path of music or if
medicine that's the very first thing we
must instill within our communities
within our audiences if we want to
inspire healing from within I'd like to
end with a quote by John Keats the
romantic English poet a very famous
quote that I'm sure all of you know
Keats himself had also given up a career
in medicine to pursue poetry but he died
when he was a year older than me and
Keith said beauty is truth and truth
beauty that is all you know on earth and
all you need to know
[Music]
[Applause]